hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of
neonewstoday.com I'm your host Dylan
Grabowski in this episode of the smart
economy podcast I sat down and spoke
with Sarah Theon a developer advocate
for filecoin virtual machine at protocol
Labs protocol Labs is an open source
research and development lab that builds
protocols tools and services for
decentralized Networks Sarah's team is
focused on supporting filecoin VM a
programmable layer for the filecoin
storage Network in this conversation we
talk about Lessons Learned From Sarah's
previous experience in both the
government and Enterprise sectors the
significance of combining smart
contracts with decentralized storage
supporting teams that are new to the
filecoin ecosystem protocol agnosticism
for the multi-chain future and much more
just a reminder nothing said on this
podcast is a solicitation to buy or sell
any tokens that nothing should be taken
as Financial advice and that the host or
guests May hold tokens discussed in any
given episode with that said I've really
enjoyed chatting with Sarah and I hope
you enjoy the conversation too
hey everyone what's going on today we
are joined by Sarah theom a developer
Advocate at the filecoin virtual machine
team how are you doing today Sarah
nice to meet you um I'm doing good um
it's been a really exciting time we are
heading to Denver in a few days and we
are launching in about less than 10 days
so it's very very insane right now yeah
you have a lot of things coming up it's
kind of crazy that you're sending your
team to a major uh what's turning into a
two-week conference here at East Denver
everything kicks off today and uh
concludes in the first week of March so
it's kind of a a rough schedule for you
to be at a major conference and also
launching on to mainnet in the coming
weeks it is it is um sometimes we also
take a pause and be like what are we
doing again no but I think it's a good
thing like we very much want to get in
touch with like to build a community
we've been building
since the start like the Inception of
fevm which is the ethereum compatible
version of the fbm and so East Denver is
like one of the big conferences for the
ethereum community and fevm is super
relevant for them so we want to make
sure that were there and we were talking
to people and getting feedback
um live so yeah a lot of exciting things
that we are doing them for itself which
will make a lot of sense as we wrap up
to a launch on March 14th yeah there's
going to be about 30 000 people here at
this East Denver this year which is the
largest that the event has ever been
able to Garner so you guys are going to
be meeting a lot of potential users and
Builders oh that's really good to know
yeah we were like kind of speculating
will it be larger like post covet or you
know smaller but no this is really good
to hear yeah it's it's going to be
awesome I myself am looking forward to
it I'm already getting a weird sense of
fomo because everybody's on Twitter
posting their flight picks where they're
coming to East Denver and I'm already
here so yeah events start to kick off
and and I'm looking forward to it
hopefully looking forward to running
into you and your team but something
that before you brought up a lot of
keywords you were talking about the fvm
and I want to dig way deep into that but
before we do that you have kind of a
cool background and before before you
were doing what you're doing now for the
fvm team you were working at Microsoft
and you also worked for gov Tech
Singapore so maybe you could just share
a little bit of your history before you
got into the blockchain space yeah
thanks for asking me that it's been such
a long time well I mean it went through
everything moves so quickly that it's
been what five months at PL sometimes it
feels like it's a whole career on its
own
the only different world I think I've
come from before joining into PL itself
and about throughout the whole so yeah I
was at Microsoft I thought of my career
there I was doing
um a whole lot of different things which
mostly do a product so product marketing
product managing and then developer
relations with like a really natural
Segway
um just because I wanted to get closer
to the people building it and like what
their experience was and digital
Community was so attractive that I just
ended up following the developer
relations at Microsoft which was very
different from what other developer
relations teams have been so so from
there then moved on to Gothic Singapore
I think I was naturally just really
curious about tech for public good and
what that can actually look like at the
institution that
um branded it because in Singapore it is
very much government-centric but how the
country moved and so it's really curious
to see how citizen application and the
tech strategy for thing about itself was
being built out so I joined that and
kind of did like an international
developer relations role so I was based
in the U.S kind of coordinating across
opportunities here back to Singapore and
to grow the ecosystem that we were
progressing up um on so after that so
that gave me a really different View and
in a whole different industry very
different ways of working very different
ways of engineering and then coming to
web 3 it was just so different I think
coming from somewhere that was much more
centralized in nature and the way that
we think about things also think about
being like a high Trend Society web 3 is
not something that it's really thought
about too much in terms of national
strategy so I was just really curious
like what they're about what is
decentralized thing that really bring
more Equity to people like everyone
involved and you know how does that look
like building from the ground up and
taking away like the piece on like
building up a reputation as the one big
company itself and having everything
centralized around it having a lot more
buffer or a lot more things in the
middle from the product itself to then
delivering their service to the customer
and what could that look like when you
flatten it down a lot more and have a
lot more people involved in a
decentralized space so that's kind of
why I got into web3
um was really fortunate to then join the
fbm team it was Pitch to me as like the
biggest thing and I didn't realize how
big it was to ballcoin and what the
launcher actually meant and what that
would mean for six months ahead and you
know all the way to the end of this year
but yeah there has been a really really
exciting Journey like fbm it's really a
big thing coming to the Falcon Network
um I think we very much started out
building it at the product on its own
but now we're recognizing that the Titan
football coin Network itself it is a
huge feature that coming to the network
and they're actually first time that
developers are going to be developing
the type from Storage providers are
going to be interacting with the network
itself rather than just making storage
deals and so that we are like getting so
much new feedback around like deal
storage deal making what that means how
people understand the network and how
things actually run and it's also a good
bottling function but I think about
streamlining certain things and making
it easier for developers all the way
from creating a storage deal into
developing your Dev itself so it's been
a huge huge undertaking for the whole
thing yeah that's awesome and filecoin
the combination of smart contracts and
decentralized storage is going to be
Mega but you did kind of talk about what
your interests were when you were
working for looking at technology for
the government of Singapore before I
went into the crypto space full-time in
2018 I was an urban planner and one of
the things that we were really talking
about uh six seven years ago were smart
cities and ways in which we can
integrate technology into the processes
of cities how we can have vehicles
communicating with infrastructure and
then sharing that information with
things like light signals so you could
start to like make the signals for City
traffic a little bit more programmable
from your role and your perspective when
you were working for gov tech for
Singapore what was the kind of view on
blockchain and cryptocurrency and these
decentralized systems was it still a
little too fresh for the government to
be looking into or was the government
very forward thinking and Innovative and
it's Tech Outlook what was the Outlook
then yeah I mean I think Outlook is a
really good way to determine I think
it's something that hasn't been
experimented upon at least within the
context of Singapore I think where it's
coming from it's definitely something
that has been looked at and considered
there are a lot of people thinking
actively thinking about it I think the
government is very aware that this space
is being built out and also as a as a
state other physical country that like
physical debate the whole crypto
Community than the webview community I
think Singapore is very open to that to
the industry coming in
um and I think things will change over
time I think the internal systems that
we have are open to the idea and
exploring it but I don't think it's been
integrated yet but will that change with
the whole industry coming into Singapore
at such a quick and Rapid Pace I think
that will change and also change the way
that we have regulations and the way
that we make space for the industry
within the country itself because I
think eventually we recognize that we
want to be a smart city and this is a
big technology that is coming up is
there a way that we can find a good
balance between being a centralized
entity supporting a very decentralized
service or application economy yeah cool
thanks for that Outlook and something
else that I think is really interesting
about your journey into where you've
ended up here where you're at today and
also using like the lessons from
yesterday when you were at Microsoft you
were doing devrel so first of all could
you just share a little bit of what
developer relationships are and also how
that ties into that kind of middle layer
that you were just talking about in
these decentralized web3 projects where
you still can have somebody that is
helping get a product released in a
non-centralized kind of entity yeah so I
think the first part to the question is
like what developer relations look like
at Microsoft so it was a pretty large
team up with me like um just for like
comparison right now we are a DX team
developer experience team of about three
with maybe it's apart from two more so
like maybe three by two and then um in
Microsoft like we had a whole huge Suite
of products that we had to advocate for
the team came up to like 30 to 40 so
it's really really really different
inside and so the work that I was
focused on particularly was was half so
half of it was around like all the
events that we were going to be doing
for developers that also thinking about
like how covet hit during that period
like how we pivoted from an in-person to
a virtual all the meetups and making
sure that you know you tear it down from
conference down to Tech down to meetups
and how they all tied in and how do you
catch other developers so very much
focused on that P
um and how we determinate get
feedback and so on and then the other
half of my work was very much focused on
the Asia Community because I was kind of
moving between the US and Singapore but
being from that region that was
something that I was taking on as well
so covering southeast Asia and Korea and
um New Zealand also like kind of looking
at that whole diverse diverse region and
how do you um localize and so I think
because the team was larger we actually
had a resources to be able to Locus
localize resources adapted for every
single region on what that developer
experience would look like and so that
was what it looked like at Microsoft and
also a lot of the resources that we put
out or things that we developed was very
much centralized so we encourage the
community to maybe build off of
something that is fully finished and
shipped from the company where like it's
very different in protocol that can just
tied into the next part of the question
which is like what do you mean by that
middle layer there
um and protocol Labs like because
everything's so open source and we did
have a small open source team as part of
developer relations at Microsoft but it
wasn't actually the company strategy for
a lot of product that we had or at least
majority of it where the protocol Labs
like 100 everything is open to us and so
that changes the way products are made
services are made like the very fact
that we incrementally delivered the
seven I call it seven which is fevm
which is also the ethereum compatible
version of Falcon Virtual Machine
incredible but we basically call it
seven and so we're using the smartphone
of everyone was a very new experience
for me because we were delivering it in
different Asia are relieving it with
different features key features coming
in at different phases and different
different phases of our incremental
delivery and all along from like phase
one till now coming up the launch we
have had people building a vet from then
and they have also been building out the
product the solutions that they're
working on at the same time and so it's
a very fast loop where we we built the
product itself and then you take it and
they're building it with us and then
they push out that service to the
community the community feedback has
maybe built something off on their own
and so that Loop just keeps spreading
and so when I did a middle layer picking
out a lot on it like do you even have
time for marketing do you have time for
like the narrative the business
development portion of it packaging it
into like a to like you know subscribe
here and then you pay that amount for
this product no not really because then
like I really the product I use the
product you give me feedback you can be
my code and then you go build your own
thing and I think that's just it's
really beautiful to watch and in a very
different ways because you're seeing
value constantly being created at a very
get paid and also people are just
feeding off each other's energy and like
the whole that's how the whole momentum
goes I think what it ties into is like a
really cool project that is one big part
of the DX work in fbm at protocol Labs
because we have like a cohort of early
builders that we've been running with
about 100 teams actually from the day we
started until now and like initially we
started like 60 teams that was like a
lot of interest and then we just kept
having rolling applications and now
we're at 100 115 teams that are building
with us which is just insane that they
have like been able to tolerate all the
like breaks and you know the network the
test Network being reset and then all
the king that they have been working
with Non-Stop and so much effort that
they put into like giving us feedback
and then also some people even like
building and doing the bug fixes with us
um so that has been really encouraging
and it's a very different way of working
I think when you say teams is this like
uh somebody that is just spinning off
like a brand new user interface for
interacting with ipfs using filecoin is
this like a new core developer that's
coming in to actually work on fevum who
are these folks and what are these teams
and what are they contributing so I
think this is the fun part right um
these people come from literally
anywhere we'd open it up to the general
public and people we have arranged we
have people that have been working with
us in the pl Network for years that are
really fitted with how the deal making
happens because that has never really
been opened up to developers in general
or that developers because that was
never really a thing for Falcon yet like
remote your storage Network do you have
these people that every season then they
would build things that are so for
example we have teams like glyph or Don
Decks that have been working on that for
a long time and so then they build out
these products that are really useful
for other depth to other developers and
other deaf developers to then utilize so
for example they build out like a
network Explorer they build out like a
Explorer API glyph wallets like
different different things like that
that have been core tooling that has
been really helpful to other people that
are coming in new and so the range goes
down to people who are maybe even new
new to validity of course I think one of
the criteria that we had when people had
some basic understanding of solidity and
we didn't have to bring them up from the
101 but then they might be new to
ballcoin and a lot of them were new to
popcorn but they've heard about the
storage capabilities and they wanted to
see what they can look like for that so
we had a range and the kind of think
that they built aside from the developer
tooling we've also had like this whole
document called the request for startups
document for fpm all these projects the
criteria that they have to be building
with fev fevm and some kind of way seven
so it wouldn't necessarily have to
interactive ipf that some of them do use
ipfs in a way for quick retrievals of
the data within if that solution
required it from upload all the way to
retrievals and some of them do you use
ipfs some of them use ipfs or backups
some of them might use it to just store
on the main Network and then take the
PID and use it solution so they're
they're a few ways that they are
interacting with the network or maybe
not at all and just interacting the test
Network and we have people that are
building out UK that from the request or
startups document that I talked about
earlier so you have developer tooling
and then you have the UK that they're
developing and though they use cases are
like a whole different bunch of things
that we've proposed but we've only seen
them progress and developed and spin out
in so many different directions from all
the team and one really good example is
called it's like the data example I
think data doubt that the whole like
doubt in general like pretty common play
but I think what the fbm really enabled
that you need is the data dial where you
can create and store large data sets and
large amounts of data within the
community itself so you could like for
example vote and then it gets uploaded
and then you can sell access to that
data set and then collect funds for your
dial Treasury and then republish that
fund for your members for example the
sponsor retrievals of the data instead
so within a lot of different kind of use
cases there we've also have things like
other tooling things dollar access
control that's a really important one
we've had someone put on encrypted nft
so they've just taken it different steps
further yeah it's huge I can go on and
on like there's so many projects I can
talk about yeah I think uh maybe we
should have asked this question 15
minutes ago but could you just tell us
what protocol Labs is and what the
relationship is with filecoin VM what do
you mean like product what is protocol
net as a company or what do we yeah
exactly because I think a lot of people
might not have heard of and you've
already called it PL so that's like the
the internal lingo so maybe we could
just like take a step back and talk
about what it is as a company oh and
then we should definitely start over
this
yeah we we jumped the gun uh but it's a
really exciting time so that's
completely understandable so yeah maybe
just uh just a quick little overview of
what the company is and then what the
relationship is with file coin VM and
then even um maybe some other clients
that PL has Okay so on ground Zone and
if you've listened this far we will now
give you the context to what you've
listened to before but yeah so PL um
protocol Labs is a project that was
started um by Juan Bernie so he is our
CEO and so about like seven years ago I
think he very much started with a
product called ipfs which is
interplanetary file system which allows
like a peer-to-peer network of like
sharing and throwing fault and making
sure replicas will swallowed exit on the
network and then on on all the different
peers in in that Community right but the
hard part there was there was no
incentivization
um you will have to have a really strong
pension for people who want to keep
storing your data so they might
disappear there's no guarantee but then
something new which is Falcon storage
Network and so that's like a it's
separate like to be very clear ballcoin
as a blockchain and a storage network is
different from my PFS ipfs not a
blockchain but it allows you to you know
kind of like current thing you do get
the store replicas of the files and
transfer and so on but it is different
we use them and complement a lot of the
times yet we do I think some
misconceptions is that sometimes people
think popcorn is an identification layer
on top of ipf it's not exactly on top of
ipfs it's separate and this is the
important distinction because then
understanding fbm and where that comes
in so ipfs then we move to having the
following Network and these two big
people constitute like key projected PL
worked on and also um a lot of our
projects have been created in complement
to either of these two technologies or
built off on top of that at the layer 2
solution so for example we have our data
retrieval team called Saturn at being
built right now so that's like a layer
on top of the L2 on top of the Far Cry
Network itself and so Bitcoin and think
about like Bitcoin IPS as being like
layer zero and the layer one that comes
in later on is not fpm so fpm like the
next huge the part that's going to come
into the barcode Network as like um
enabling programmability of the storage
on the network so that would be your one
sitting there what it does is that it
allows you to program the metadata of
the storage unit that's stored on the
network so you're not actually to be
clear you're not programming the data
inside those storage Fields you can do
that with like decentralized compute
using evm or fpm Falcon Virtual Machine
to orchestrate those jobs for you to do
decentralized computation of the data
inside the storage deal but if you're
using fbm on its own and you can use it
for various mutated you don't actually
have to open up the Target Field to
access the data you could be like this
data if you're new or need to be
transferred to someone else and so on so
on but you're not Computing the data
it's like just want to be clear that
because some people uh it is kind of
confusing sometimes so what acts as like
a side layer or it's its own new part of
the stack it's a new part of the stack
yeah so it think of it like it's not a
separate project to Falcon and it's
actually going to be like a feature of
Alki Network so it's a huge launch and
so there's a lot of emphasis on fdm FM
fpm but eventually fbm rolled up into
Falcon itself yeah and can you just
maybe uh eli5 why fvm is separate from
evm like why can't the ethereum
blockchain do the things that fem is
going to do yeah I'm so that's a really
good question I think I should I'm just
pretty simple like it's simple but it's
not right like it took a really long
time to get there
um but I heard that with evm you can
write a smart contract but then you
would probably have to write storage so
you have to write to a separate storage
platform to be able to access that for
your adaptive work that could be
expensive it could also be not
performing so and it doesn't give you as
much control over how you want to eat
the data up how you want to manipulate
that torch having fbm itself I'll talk
about fevf in relation to the EPM fevm
allows you to use whatever tooling you
are familiar with with the evm so if
you're a youth formative Like Remix hard
hat we can starter kids and we have
tutorials for that use that connect it
to the PowerPoint Network right now if
the test network but later on by match
blocking there will be the main Network
connected to the right Network and
you'll be able to deploy your evm
contract into Falcon itself so you're
not actually deploying to the ethereum
blockchain you'll be deploying to the
Falcon blockchain but you're using
everything you're familiar with and when
you do that like whatever function that
you have in your smart contract you can
have those functions in direct the
storage itself directly they are saving
cost it should be technically cheaper um
to do it though it doesn't work
performance but it's not a native
environment and with the fbm itself I
want to see how we build it out and how
we enable what we plan for the native
version of fbm whether a foreign runtime
version of fevn but the fbm version as I
know today is very very granular with
the way that we allow you to manage to
manipulate the storage itself you have a
lot of control over that you can even
like decide how you want to put your
programming right there next to your
storage within the whole setup itself so
that within architecture itself so I
want to see whether we enable that
feature with fev on itself but I think
that is pretty much the goal so these
are all the additional benefits that you
get by using fevm compared to just evm
as far as on its own so we've actually
done a lot of like partner hackathons
with each Global up to date we see a lot
of collaboration and a lot of like good
benefits in working together which is
why like yeah we are very much Tech in
the ethereum community right now are
there going to be any people during the
build-a-thon here at youth Denver that
are building on your toolkit are you
familiar with any teams yeah we have
like um so as far as I know we have like
15 teams that coming down in person that
um have been these are like part of the
early Builder cohort that we've been
having for five months now and so
they'll be very important you should
come by and check it out like don't it's
not much first if anyone here but yeah
you can see a whole Showcase of what
they've been building so it sounds like
you guys have built fevm to kind of go
after and Garner the current market
share of evm-based developers and then
you're going to take lessons learned to
build out the native more granular fvm
are you guys kind of using this as an
opportunity to lure away evm devs and to
start building more natively on fvm is
that why you're kind of iterating as you
guys see fit not necessarily in your way
I don't think that's really the intent
um yeah a good choice of work but it's
not that intense I think the idea really
is that around foreign runtime think
about like the strategy for fbm is that
we will have native and that would be a
huge part and that'll be the core part
but we also have order like at least 40
percent of our strategy to the foreign
runtime right so ethereum was a really
big bet for us and the community is very
active and we did want to tap into that
Community not necessarily lure them away
but have them work on fvm you think evm
tooling which is complementary to what
the ethereum foundation would like to
select the community in with right so
which is why we have so many hackathons
that are in partnership with them and
then also we are not intending to be we
intend to be VM agnostic so it's not
easy theorem today but it could be
another chain altogether in a few months
that we're exploring like how do we then
activate the polygon Community but a lot
of thinking having this in mind before
we've reached this point is really
important because the way that we've
built out all the compatibility for
foreign runtimes all the feature
Integrations that allow for foreign
runtime to be accommodated for within
fem we've built it out being BMW
agnostic so whatever we've done with
ethereum today we should be able to take
it with them either Factory they then
build it up for like other chains that
we want to work with as well so I think
that's the strategy for the foreign
runtime site and then for the native
side and Native is always going to be
better I think that's just generally how
it is we don't expect developers to
change like the reason why we put in so
much effort in making sure that they can
use the tooling they're comfortable with
is that we want a day where they're
where they want to be right we don't
necessarily think they have the trunk
button either but is it going to be more
is it going to use like a better usage
of gati if you use a native version
because it is a little bit bloated when
you accommodate for foreign runtime
whereas like if you use the native
version and you use like right they did
the recommended languages that compile
really well to one of them because it
wasn't time under the hood so we very
much recommend that you know if you if
you wanted the optimization you could
change you could opt to use the native
version but if you really got a solution
that's running an evm and you want to
write to storage within the same
environment EPM so fvm is going to be
polyglot or is it just going to be rust
and C sharp it was intended to be
polyglot like you could use like we've
built that SDK for assembly script goal
data all being built out already I could
be preparing for the native Marathon I'm
2.2 so right now foreign
language out there that's really why we
chose use one yeah I kind of buy into
the multi-language thesis as well why
Corner a new Dev who's migrating from
some sort of like centralized web 2
company why force them to learn a
blockchain specific language like
solidity why not just provide them with
the toolage that can allow them to
compile into something that the
blockchain will be able to read or
interact with yeah 100 yeah and
um one of the the leaders the thought
leaders in the Neo ecosystems and x
Microsoft guide John davidos spent 20
years at
microsoft.net from something like zero
to 500 million dollars a year in Revenue
yeah and um he's always talking about
you know how many developers do we have
across the world something like 20
million 200 million a crazy number like
that and how many blockchain developers
do we have like maybe a couple hundred
thousand so how do we get the next wave
of devs building these decentralized
architectures and it's by meeting them
where they're at allowing them to use
the language they're the most proficient
with yeah exactly I think you hit the
nil on the hit like you know at the end
of the day I think Blossom is great like
I'm a fan I think it enables a lot of
that ideology and you know even through
things like let's say like chat GPT like
we were playing around with it yesterday
and we were like oh we can actually get
certain um contracts like reference
contracts like a really simple version
using chai GPT and you know there are
all these tooling that coming in and
eventually languages I think I don't
think will ever go away that you you
know learning a language is not going to
be beneficial it will always be
beneficial but will the barriers between
learning one language and not knowing
another one uh get thinner and then over
time I think it will
um and we see a lot of Technology coming
in so I think building a hit for like a
polygon accommodating for polyglot
version of like what you're building is
going to be yeah potential and important
absolutely and something else that I'm a
big believer in obviously I've been
covering the Neo ecosystem since 2018 so
I have to believe this is there's a
multi-chain future so when you guys are
looking into adding support for other
chains obviously you start with Eva M
because that's just where the most
developers are right now but there's
also these other blossoming ecosystems
like Solana the cosmos SDK IBC world of
course you know I've been covering Neo
day in and day out and there's a
plethora of developers here so there are
probably so many other communities out
there and other ecosystems that we're
not even accounting for and just like
the top three that I just mentioned what
does that kind of outlook look like when
there's a multi-chain future but you
don't know which kind of tools to start
building for how do you take into
perspective the fact that there are just
so many different ecosystems out there
and how do you allow for kind of like
Plug and Play interoperability yeah um I
think that's really important question
that we also have to scope out at some
point
right and you think about it I think I
will see this fbm coming to webview I
haven't been in webpage for a long time
of course but
um with all my other like people within
PL that have been inviting me and also
like giving me a lot of contact I've
dropped so much in the past month
um in the community a lot right I think
what we realized is that fbm is going to
be a game changer I think that's not
just us being like Oh well we're
building the meeting everything's
amazing we generally believe that it
will be a game changer
um because it you know for the first
time um you are building programmability
with storage in the same environment and
starts to shift key right this I think
will enable web 3 as a whole like the
team teamwork agree to move to a skill
that is as large as World web 2 is
capable of I think this is the starting
point for us to do that and though
because the impact is going to be too
huge we have anticipated that you know
we hope eventually that the goal is that
it's a multi-chain place right that this
is something that every everyone can use
in general and really change the
industry at large because of that why
when we are the credit question of how
we built for interoperability I think
what we can manage as a team I think
what makes the most sense like if you
want to get to a point where so many
change can use it but we want to get
that fast we can't do it alone that's
why like for us like open source
Community supporting the whole the whole
concept of PR Network I don't think I've
been at a company that has really built
so much and like I mean one thing but
like giving resources giving grants
giving mentorship and like moving the
team our engineer to work with other
Engineers from the network itself or
like outstanding Community contributor
we're very much in that Spirit and the
same goes for fbm like we will pick some
key chains that we want to build with
like yes we're looking at ethereum like
we're doing it we've done ethereum we're
almost there and then we're going to do
polygon and then maybe we'll do Solana
right depending maybe the large one
depending on what our community feedback
does and what's really important to them
but then we also really much hope that
our community gets inspired and also get
the right guidance and under the kind of
documentation from us the learn how to
build that out on their own as well and
so we have that then we can scale like
super fats right so that I think that's
very much the goal like we have I think
that's a good point I'm like to do this
we have to give documentation on how you
can you know build for other change as
well but obviously that will only come
back much later when we're this is
actually working and running yeah
that'll be having to build out
documentation for other chains is a good
problem it's something that is a pain to
do but if the demand is there then that
means you guys are doing something right
you mentioned grants so what does the
grant funding ecosystem look like what
are the types of grants that get
distributed who are the types of teams
that are applying for Grants what's the
size of the grant fund just would love
to hear more about that yeah um I think
it's a rolling program that we have like
we just finished like one round off
grounds that we gave out I think it was
somewhere like 100k or 150k
realistically as well like we do want to
manage expectations but I think the
reality is that we know we're in crypto
winter but at the same time time we just
also just released the next round of
grant that we're going to give like
trans to it now radiant actually open
for applications everything we're going
to give out like 20 20 grand if I'm not
wrong without a 15 to 20 grand and each
Grant type is about 5k I think that's
more micro guns because a lot of these
Builders are starting out we're just
starting out with their projects I mean
given that this is such a new feature to
the whole system something that every
project is kind of like at super early
stage so we're going to need 5K runs if
we go along I think there is like it's
not the only thing they were doing like
we're also doing things like impact
evaluator so that comes from our Network
good Network Goods team and so Network
Goods really look there like what's the
public good impact of these projects
that are being built so not just having
projects built for in first day or
building tooling to support other
developers but although like how do you
build stuff that is going to change the
world for people on the street like
people that don't even know what video
is right why would it care how do we
make the different for them so we have
like games like that we want to give
like a slightly smaller Bounty but we
give that too
um we've also invested really heavily
into our hackathon pipeline like each
lower has been in a meeting impacted
we've worked with we've run two really
successful hackathons now one last
November and one just recently that just
ended in February and like we've seen
like what it was like it was a two-day
hackathon and a 20-day hackathon but in
total we repeat like somewhere of like
250 submissions I know so it's been a
lot of project that I've come to the
pipeline cool so yeah so we we are
investing there as well we give a lot
about either everything or hackathon
that we're running uh equals not the
only product that we're talking to
because we're trying to see and this
will run all the way to the end of 2023
so a lot of bounties that are sitting
there as well they give to teams right
and then at the same time we also have
accelerator programs that we are
actively looking for so there's just so
much focus on fpm right now that we have
our accelerator team actively working
with all accelerated partners and having
them look at the pool of early builders
that are on our readers the imported can
take up as they progress you know like
reject now but then guide them with
mentorship they were pushing into that
program as well and then bring them on
their accelerator data on so like even
at if Denver is the first March event
that we're running we're gonna have a 15
team showcase and details built for six
months but we're also inviting all our
accelerated partners and investors to
come into the party as well so that they
can see what people are building so
we're trying to give all these like
support to all these teams and not just
like have our productive but have all
these projects that have the owner
product succeed as well yeah that's
super cool I'm a member of a community
funding Dao and we recently funded a
team Distributing small micro grants as
well we recently funded A team out of
Nigeria who is incentivizing blood drive
donations wow by providing soul-bound
nfts to people who donate blood and then
also for the international kind of like
crypto space you can purchase what's
called a life nft and portions of that
proceeds will go into a raffle pool that
both nft buyers and blood donors are
entered into so you're incentivizing
people to donate to blood drive
campaigns financially and you're also
incentivizing people to go and actually
donate blood in a country that is at a
blood donation deficit year after year
so it's really cool to kind of see these
opportunities arise that like web3 has
enabled through unique funding
opportunities and also verifying that
they did indeed occur through this
immutable Ledger that everybody has
access to so I'm super curious to hear
and and it sounds like these efforts
through the accelerator programs and
through the grant programs and just kind
of like onboarding devs has really
ramped up in the time since you got
there so maybe in your your tenure what
are some of the successes that you've
seen from these Outreach efforts and
these supportive efforts are you
starting to feel the vibe that the
flywheel is starting to pick up and this
regenerative kind of progress is
starting to be made forward yeah I I
think that there are a lot of games I'm
really really proud of as a whole like
as you can see like passion for the
cohort that we've been working with only
because I think at this point like we
you know we meet on a weekly basis
actually so it's been weekly like touch
point which is like more than I talked
to my parents more than more than that
then September last year so like I know
the community well I'm like really
really proud of all the professors that
they've had you know we have so many
conditions like we've had the team
called like Health storage that has been
built like I'm just gonna talk to like
some key teams like they're all amazing
I can like talk to a hundred UK sets but
obviously not going to get there but
like like hot storage is a really good
example like Perpetual storage and so
when I first met them in September like
they've been building a bus for a while
now like they've been part of the Falcon
ecosystem and they've been in like
experimenting with fpm but they haven't
really implemented it yet and a lot of
their code was actually um using EVMS
and using biology so when evm came about
it made them it made it really easy for
them to import that and that I've seen
them progress so much further like from
having a Perpetual storage platform to
then allow any brain access control and
encryption for the storage that you
upload and then think the part that
started to make them go like slightly
viral or through all the hackathons that
we had where they then turned what they
had into an APK and like a really simple
pli that people could use and you feel
like everyone's like I want to build
that but maybe I don't want to get into
the whole story of how I can make
storage deals because you know it maybe
it's not my focus and I don't want to
spend too much time then so they take
like this application alone have allowed
so many teams to build the project that
they want to build like if you look at I
would say a good 30 of hackathon
projects just have these you know
Incorporated like hot storage API and
then they can have large done and then
build everything on top of that so
that's a really good example if you're
talking about things that uh you talked
about you know what your community
funding dial had supported with Africa
like doing um identifys.drive that
donation drive we have a fair share of
like solutions that I've built for Game
Changers and I think sometimes is a
little bit hard to remember this because
you know we have when you get into web 3
one thing I realized is that you get
into a lot of the intricacies of how
things work like there's a lot of
Independence and like you're like the
dog that walks the Dove and hold it on
Niche because you have to know like you
know that that Meme of that dog walking
I always think of that because I'm like
you need to know everything right to be
able to build and so a lot of projects
and a fair significant portion of our
cohort is focused on the intricacy of
making life easier as a developer within
web people we it's easy to forget like
what happens if I don't care about what
to do and I want if I want skill across
like let's say you can develop whether
the preference point you have like
whatever you did is not like 200 million
or something like that right I don't
like the number you get one but you know
although the hundred thousand there are
blockchain developers who's going to
care right so we have like projects that
we're building up more and more now
where I think we've gone into another
majority of heaven where people can then
build full depths you have your thoughts
you have your retrieval and then you
have whatever feature that you wanted to
build programming wise with FPS and so
we see more projects like that now one
really interesting one that came out
recently is like Guardian view which I
thought was really cool um it's like a
whistleblowing platform but it's like
secure communication between the
journalists that can then opt into the
platform mental Bond token but then can
also burn it and opt out when they feel
like my job is being in danger I need to
opt out right now but you know they can
stay on the platform and then The
Whistleblower themselves can then use
like a storage to then upload the data
into this picture is a great story right
they're using like hot storage and then
encrypt it and then also said like be
able to customize the duration of access
that the journalist can touch that piece
of content so and it's assigned to a
specific fpt so only the journal
character and I've seen like the demo
and I've worked in every day I'm like
this is great like you know we could
even put it out today and it could
actually help a lot of people right so
this is an example of how that whole
Community like if you're asking about
the regenerative portion like that's how
I see them supporting each other in the
longer term no because it's just one
bank or six months that we've run I am
curious to see how we are able to keep
this pipeline going of like projects
that come up and then um like right now
we're gonna launch peppermint I think
one of we just her Lego chat around like
what is the narrative or how that goes
and we're thinking about you know we
also need to be able to inspire more
Builders to build more integration like
what similar to Wildlife Health storage
has done and keep if you think if you're
building a debt when you think of people
missing like without notifications
through hackathons like a very simple
integration with push protocol has not
happened so people can integrate that
into their deck do you think that's
nothing build it out and so we want to
encourage Builders to do that as much as
possible and like create platforms for
them to Showcase that to the community
so that people can take that and build
um so we've incorporated into cheat
sheet for hackathon
um resources the docs itself and we're
hoping through these efforts it then
allows the community to keep supporting
itself and building out all these yeah
absolutely this is where composability
in web3 is so cool because once you
build a tool a template an interface
something that that code is open source
and can be reused and iterated upon
which is super exciting this might be
kind of an unfair question because
you've only been with Pia well and
working in the filecoin ecosystem for
less than a year but the entire time
I've been in the crypto space since
2017-18 filecoin has been a thing I've
always known about the fill token you
know it's just been around but it seems
like right now things are really
starting to kick up to launch into a new
like a new phase even a new chapter
I guess my question is why now why in
the past year what changed what made
like the filecoin ecosystem kind of like
launch into this brand new vision that's
going to make it more interoperable more
usable more integratable and really just
kind of like like this brand new thing
that seems like it has a much more
desirable use case I'm so glad that
that's the impression I mean sometimes
it's hard to like accept it for myself
the way I see it I think what I've
picked up is also I think fbm is
changing the whole narrative around what
ballcoin is I mean for a very long like
this is with the whole master plan that
like Planet always talked about right so
we start with building a super robust
storage Network it's been Cooper uphill
and like the team has done an amazing I
think the team and all the teams the pl
team and all the teams that I've been
building about have done an amazing job
of like and like fixing their getting
started onboarded getting all that
committed capacity for the network and
so that's a lot of building right and I
think that's probably the 20 2015 all
the way to like 2020 portion where we're
fixing all these steps right and so now
that's like that one and then step two
was around adding data onboarding so
that's something that was still going on
with right now it's kicking off it's
ramping up I think the fact that VM is
coming to the network is going to change
a lot of things and people are like oh
that's the reason why I would want to
store things on the Falcon Network like
there's an additional incentive it's not
like I'm starting it there that I have
right through it and I have to pay the
cost and then it becomes a combination
around comparing costs of other storage
network but then now it's like there's
an additional reason that I go there
because I can do everything all at once
in the network itself and so I that
would very much be step three which is
around like anything that
programmability of the network so I
think that that one took a pretty long
time enough that two have been happening
in the past two years and then now step
three coming in really hot and fast now
and so I think that's why a lot of um a
lot of more energy has come out around
balcony yeah that's a really good
example so the first five years was kind
of like building the infrastructure for
the city to be built on top of or kind
of like the mass under the tip of the
iceberg it took a long time to get that
plumbing built yeah so that you can now
build a robust ecosystem on top of that
infrastructure yeah and I think um I
mean I think it's fair to say that we
have a very long-term view on this I
think when we built the Innovations
we're not just thinking like the fall
coin in the whole world how is it going
to change the industry and laptop is
going to change Tech and so even if we
think like oh we took full five years to
build a plumbing fbm is technically full
of Plumbing right so you know that could
take like a year two more years and then
we get to a point where then people can
take off it you just enter it don't know
that maybe get to a point on local no
code and it just go like even larger
whatever you think is big now like it's
not even big enough like where we're
thinking I'm thinking like way way
bigger so yeah really exciting future
ahead I have um a brief question and I'm
cognizant of your time so we'll wrap up
shortly but from your experience working
on cloud teams in devrel at Microsoft
maybe just having this Insider knowledge
why are decentralized networks
competitive to centralized Networks it's
like huge like huge question
uh
this is my personal opinion not
representative of PL I don't think
either component will ever go away I
think centralized and detention life
will have to work together actually
benefit them both and this is not just
like a politically correct uncle
whatever I'm like I really developed
them but when you need both right to an
extent and having worked at a government
has also made me realize that as well so
I think detention like Peter the
benefits are pretty clear you know it's
Democratic as much as possible it pushes
the envelope on what democracy can right
when you think I don't think it also
moves really fast super agile I think
just by the fact and then maybe not the
technology itself but maybe because
everything's decentralized everyone's
owning a large part of it you have you
have to have people that are operating
part of the network that are very
knowledgeable and so it's mostly open
source things are very transparent and
Brandy is a key part of the whole
cultural Library
um so that allows like much faster
communication feedback would be much
faster every product like being
optimized and features changing I like
sometimes time I think I run by a book
now I thought that like the way that we
you know measure like when our um our
blockchain speeches at one point but
yeah time is just Dependable in my view
I feel like things just moved so far
like people are like oh three weeks like
that's a lot of time we can build like a
full app I'm like okay assuming you know
people eat but you know like the past
like I think that's part of the nature
and if you like those are the benefits
but then with centralized ways of
engineering I think that there are some
benefit to that too that you have it's
easier to maintain things in the long
term like or you have like one whole
deck that works well together I think
that's like the key part right because
in the naturalized Network there it's a
lot of backflow accommodation sometimes
because you also have to figure out like
if I built this thing but then I don't
know what everyone else is building and
then we are like at the same time we're
like let many flowers bloom and we want
everything to be built all at once but
it's every single project going to be
successful or where you have like a lot
of project that is not being used that's
one thing to consider but in a
centralized version like the whole
street that you go in and then
everything's there for you to use so I
think the challenge that we have with
fbm as well like how do we create a
really simple way for developers to come
in and be like here are so many options
for you but here's a really easy route
that you can take all like to trading
this way either you develop that you can
take to get there right but that's a lot
of coordination that you have to do
because of detention life residentiality
is much easier to do that so yeah I
think I did benefit them both I think
that they both have to work in
complement eventually yeah and also like
the other part is that Tech is one thing
the people part is another thing and
then the regulation and having that be
like formalized into the way things run
like government or whatever it is like
that's a whole other thing right so you
you can't just be purely didn't your
life to like Central you have to have
like a mix of both to be able to effect
change I think will change in society at
large yeah this is again like a decent
kind of question so this is like a very
conceptual view of How It's eating yeah
I appreciate that and there's always
Nuance right it's not going to be AWS or
ipfs it'll be AWS and ipfs yeah
exam things you you might want to have
versions of something on both so you
know for whatever user that you need
one kind of like final last bigger
picture question since you're in the
decentralized file storage space
um what's kind of the buzz or the
general outlook for the future of
decentralized storage what are the big
Milestones that people are kind of
talking about and I'll give a perfect
contextual example on the narrative for
ethereum in 2020 and 2021 was migrating
to proof of stake and that was just like
a big General kind of like direction we
were heading so is there something
similar for decentralized storage in
that little like Realm of the web 3
space not I mean in as large as what
people think the whole discussion was
around
I don't think so I mean introducing
programmability on the storage like I'm
not just in did not call them from fem
but like that is also a big thing that's
coming right and then also I think more
than like a month ago and on time is
that weird to me now but I remember like
buying hands but something really I was
like a fair feel of Greenfield kind of
version but it was very similar to what
fbm it is almost like what fbm is trying
to accomplish and so they're building
that out right now which is also
programmability on storage so if that's
picking up and then we are launching as
well like I'm pretty sure there's going
to be a lot of talk around this new
feature to internalized storage and
curious to see what they're going to
come up with as well and like what that
will look like and whether more such
versions will come up I mean it's good
like I think we wanted to disrupt things
and so it's flattery yeah good to see
yeah that's really cool it's it's like
in the web 3 space you're always on The
Cutting Edge so it's super exciting so
you mentioned that a lot of your team
and other teams that are building on fvm
are coming to East Denver and you guys
are also launching fevm on mainnet soon
so maybe just wrapping up can you share
some exciting things on the road map
even if you're repeating something
you've already said and and maybe what's
the best way for people to keep in
contact with you and with the team yeah
of course so uh March 14th the easy way
to remember the day is 314 which is pi
we call it paid because our chain ID for
some reason is also 3141 for a hybrid
test network uh yeah zero four right now
so yeah it'll be Pi Day we will launch
seven to main Network it's already in
our test Network it's already in our
calibration Network it's been tested out
right now so if you if you want to go
experiment you can go experiment on
calibration net if you're a storage
provider of content calibration that
would be more appropriate if you are a
developer you want to muck around you
can test fill I'll hypothe test Network
running so you can use that and then
once we launch the main Network test
test we will let people see people
building and giving us feedback we yeah
we anticipate dragons and like random
stuff to happen so you know all ready
for that and then um if you want to get
connected with us like the Falcon plug
is a really good place to go I would say
on the channel where all the buses
happening around is the full Builder so
that's
fil-builders not diddler Builder the
field Builders is the channel that you
can go through and you know ask any
questions there are no dumb questions
we've been also helping to clarify a lot
of and identifying with confessions that
people have which is why it's been a
little bit of that in earlier in the
podcast but yeah you can check that out
there
um we also have an early Builder cohort
that is building right now we are still
progressing what that will look like
once we launch because we do expect a
lot of apps to be deployed to midnight
within the first month of launch so if
you want to participate in that meet
that from Phil border we'll be having
some sign ups or registration there as
well and we yeah we aim to have like a
hundred depth deployed the main net
within a month of launch so that would
be an exciting and intense time but you
know again everything is possible in
three weeks apparently so we'll get
there after that we will have the native
version of fpm being built up later half
of 2023 so that will definitely come out
as well so this whole year a lot of fbm
things will be being built out awesome
well Sarah it was uh really really fun
to chat with you to hear about really
cool things that you guys have going on
and the psych and the passion that your
team has and just the big picture
narrative shift of adding
programmability to decentralized storage
it was really cool to geek out with you
on this for the past hour and I look
forward to hopefully running into you
and your team at East Denver yeah I'll
come by you know we'll have to meet you
in East Denver and
check out what seven minutes building
but yeah thanks so much for having us
like we are very excited to be part of
like you know sharing it more today
because some people are really
interested so they're both great awesome
can't wait to keep up okay great thank
you cheers
well what did you think that
conversation I really enjoyed these
conversations with Builders who are deep
in the weeds it's just really inspiring
to hear their passion shine through
especially when new projects are joining
an ecosystem after so many years of
building I also like the approach that
the team is taking to building robust
support for the filecoin VM with an evm
based Focus first but also planned chain
agnosticism to support other ecosystems
that might begin to flourish in the
future it was also a fun conversation
and just awesome to catch up on all the
great things that are going on in the
filecoin ecosystem the project has been
around longer than I've been in the
space and I'll definitely be keeping an
eye out for the March 2023 rollout of
the new filecoin VM on that note I want
to thank you so much for taking the time
to listen to the smart economy podcast
if you liked what you heard and want to
support the show please keep Neo news
today in mind when voting for your Neo
Council representative as part of Neo's
governance process we appreciate you and
look forward to catching you next time
foreign